Esca (Black Measles) and Brown Wood-Streaking:
Two Old and Elusive Diseases of Grapevines
“Esca” disease of grapevine has long
been known wherever grapes are grown.
The disease may be as old as vine cultivation itself. References to esca-like symptoms are found in several ancient Greek
and Latin works. Greater descriptive accuracy is found in medieval works such as
the Kitab al-Felahah by Ibn al-Awam, a
Spanish Muslim who lived in Seville at the
end of the twelfth century, and the Opus
Ruralium Commodorum by Pietro de’
Crescenzi, born around 1233 in Bologna.
Esca is a Latin word meaning food, aliment, or, figuratively, bait. The name indirectly refers to the fruiting bodies of certain wood-rotting fungi. For example,
Fomes, which in Latin means “tinder,” is
the name of a genus of basidiomycetes
once used to make a dry, easily ignited
material suitable to start fires when using
flints. Wood decayed by these fungi, including rotted grapevine wood, burned
slowly and was used to keep fires aglow
without a flame.
Esca is a complex disease that comprises
an array of symptoms, some of which have
locally given their own names to the disease. For example in California, the dark,
tiny spotting of the grapes is called “black
measles.” In many grapevine-growing
areas of the world, the sudden wilting of
esca-affected vines in summer has earned
this form of the disease the name
“apoplexy.”
Research on the etiology of esca, which
started at the end of the nineteenth century
in France, can be divided into three periods. The first period began in 1898 with
Ravaz (61) and ended in 1926 with Viala
(79). The overall conclusion of this period
was that two basidiomycetous fungi,
Stereum hirsutum (Willd.) Pers. and
Phellinus (Fomes) igniarius (L.:Fr.) Quél.,
were the causal agents, although this could
not be shown by pathogenicity tests. However, in Italy in 1912, Petri (58) successfully reproduced some early internal esca
symptoms with two undetermined species
of Cephalosporium and one of Acremonium that had also been associated with the
disease. The second period in esca research
started in California in 1957 with Hewitt
(35) and lasted until 1959, when Chiarappa
(9) detected the relationship between internal wood decay and black measles. He also
showed how a Cephalosporium sp. reproduced in vivo some of the symptoms observed in the wood of diseased vines, and
how P. igniarius caused wood decay in
vitro. The third period, initiated by
Larignon and Dubos in 1987 (39) and still
underway, is directed at understanding the
role of the mitosporic (asexually reproducing) fungi that act alone or together
with the basidiomycetes to cause esca and
related diseases.
In the 1990s, studies on esca and its etiology have intensified. This came after a
dramatic upsurge in the disease, especially
in Germany, Italy, and Greece, where the
arsenites, traditionally used to keep esca
under control, have been banned and were
replaced by less effective fungicides. However, even in France, Portugal, and Spain,
where restricted use of sodium arsenite is
still permitted, esca is widespread in all
vine-growing regions.
This paper refers mostly to conditions in
the Mediterranean area and focuses on the
progress achieved in our understanding of
esca over the last few years. Reference is
also made to a decline of young grapevines
caused by some of the same mitosporic
fungi as those commonly associated with
esca in adult vines. Finally, the relations
between esca and related syndromes or
diseases are also discussed.
Syndromes Involved
Esca is a complex disease whose symptoms arise from structural and physiological changes that cannot be reduced to a
simple scheme of cause and effect. Consequently, symptoms that look alike may
have different causes.
Apart from the occasional delayed
sprouting of esca-affected vines in the
spring, external symptoms in the Northern
Hemisphere develop on the crown between
June and September, either through the
entire vine or on single branches. The development of esca syndrome can be of two
types, chronic or acute.
Chronic esca syndrome. Chronic esca
comprises symptoms inside the trunk and
larger branches, on the shoots and smaller
branches, on the leaves, and on the berries.
Symptoms inside trunk and main
branches. On adult plants (8 to 10 years
and older), the most common internal
symptom is white rot, which gradually
changes the hard wood to a soft, friable,
spongy mass. Rotted tissues appear creamy
yellow or whitish, and in cross section are
often bordered by a thick black or dark
brown line separating rotted from nondecayed wood. The decay usually starts from
a large pruning wound on the trunk extending into the woody tissue and either
remains restricted to the older part of the
wood or spreads along a sector in the
woody cylinder (Figs. 1 and 2). Sometimes
the rot approaches or reaches the surface,
causing cracks along the trunk (this is
called “mal dello spacco”—cracking disease—in Italy; Fig. 3). The decay usually
extends downward and upward along the
trunk, decreasing in size away from its
point of origin, but it seldom develops
Dr. Mugnai’s address is: Istituto di Patologia e
Zoologia forestale e agraria, Università, P. le delle
Cascine, 28, 50144 Firenze, Italy; 39-55-3288377,
Fax: 39-55-354786, E-mail: laura@ipaf.fi.cnr.it
Publication no. D-1999-0223-01F
© 1999 The American Phytopathological Society
Plant Disease / May 1999 405
below the graft union and never affects the
roots. However, old, ungrafted mother
vines of American or Euro-American hybrids may show the same internal symptoms as grafted European cultivars.
Various other types of wood deterioration become visible together with or even
preceding white rot: (i) small, dark brown
or black spots in cross section appear as
deep brown or black streaks or columns in
longitudinal section. In cross section, the
spots are sparsely distributed or arranged
in groups around an annual growth ring or
in the woody tissues close to the pith (Figs.
1A and B, 2); (ii) pink-brown or dark redbrown areas often develop from black
spots (Figs. 1B, 2), mainly in the core of
the trunk or on the margin of decayed or
necrotic tissues, separating such tissues
from apparently healthy tissue; and (iii)
brown areas of varying shade and texture
are intermingled with the above types of
discoloration, often in sectors connected
with large wounds (Fig. 2).
On plants younger than 8 to 10 years,
external leaf and berry symptoms of esca
(see below) are often associated with a
limited wood discoloration inside the
trunk. However, white rot in the trunk of
young grapevines with leaf symptoms of
esca is observed very rarely.
The various types of wood discoloration
and decay are the result of a number of
structural and physiological changes: (i)
physical and chemical changes caused by
the introduction of air and water into
wounds (1) and the host reactions to such
wounding (e.g., degradation, oxidation,
and darkening of tissue components); (ii)
changes caused by cellulolytic and ligninolytic enzymes produced by the fungi
associated with esca (10,54); (iii) tylosis
induced by growth-regulating substances,
and vascular occlusion due to gels and
gums secreted by the diseased xylem parenchyma cells, or even to high-molecularweight compounds produced by the pathogen(s); and (iv) necrosis of xylem parenchyma cells as the result of diffusion of the
pathogen’s toxins (76), host reaction products (e.g., phytoalexins), or both.
Symptoms on leaves. Symptoms on
leaves consist of light green or chlorotic,
rounded or irregular spots between the
veins or along the leaf margins that usually
spread outward to the distal parts of the
shoots (Fig. 4). The spots, initially small
and scattered over the lamina, gradually
expand and coalesce, become partly necrotic, and ultimately leave only a narrow
strip of unaffected green tissue along the
main veins (Fig. 4A). As the chlorotic
tissue turns yellow-brown or red-brown
(Fig. 4B and C) (or, in the case of certain
cultivars, develops rust-colored necrotic
areas with dark red margins), the diseased
leaves assume a “tiger-stripes” pattern
(Fig. 4D). Sometimes the necrotic areas of
the lamina dry out and become detached,
leaving irregular leaf margins. Other
symptoms, such as clearing, puckering,
glistening, and distortion of the leaf lamina
(9), are less common.
The appearance of wilt symptoms in the
crown could be explained in terms of xylem dysfunction. However, for various
reasons, it seems unlikely that leaf necrosis
and wilting of shoots and fruits are due to
water stress caused by vascular occlusion
(78). Vascular occlusion, where it exists,
affects only a part of the trunk, mainly the
nonfunctional woody rings. The functional
wood is usually not discolored, but even if
it were, the xylem vessels of woody dicotyledons form an integrated system that
can compensate for any change in water
potential that might occur as a result. In
any case, only two or three annual increments of functional xylem are needed to
sustain vigorous shoot growth and abundant grape production (59).
It seems more likely that the foliar
symptoms of esca are mainly caused by
substances that originate in the discolored
woody tissues of the trunk and branches
and are then translocated to the leaves in
the transpiration stream. These substances
can be reaction products of the wood,
phytotoxic metabolites excreted by esca
Fig. 1. Cross sections through the trunk of a 25-year-old grape cv. Sangiovese vine affected by esca. The trunk was cut into 3- to 5-
cm-thick sections, which on the photograph show wood symptoms in a clockwise direction, starting from the trunk base up to the
portion where two large pruning wounds were made. The lowest trunk sections (A–C) show black spotting, brown-red wood, and
initial symptoms of white rot (slightly yellow in the picture) starting from the pith. The rotted wood gradually extends toward the
large wounds (D). In the upper trunk sections (E and F), yellowish, soft, and spongy rotted wood (white rot) predominate, being
bordered by a thick black line that in turn is surrounded by a marginal band of brownish red wood.
406 Plant Disease / Vol. 83 No. 5
fungi, or a combination of both. In a recent
study, foliar symptoms similar to those
caused by esca were produced when culture filtrates (or their fractions) of three
fungi associated with the disease (see below) were absorbed by detached grapevine
leaves (Fig. 5). Polysaccharides (pullulans)
were purified from the cultures of two of
the above fungi (Phaeoacremonium) and
were shown to be nonselectively toxic to
cuttings of grapevine and other plants (76).
Symptoms on shoots and branches.
Symptoms can start in spring with delayed
and weak growth and end in autumn with
reduced lignification of the canes. In late
spring and summer, an irreversible wilt of
some shoots or of an entire branch may
occur.
Symptoms on berries and clusters. Spotting of berries, sometimes without accompanying foliar symptoms, is common in
California and southern Italy and has also
been reported from France (Alsace) on
adult as well as young vines, especially
white grape cultivars (9,19,31,33). Minute
dark brown, violet, or purple spots develop
more or less abundantly on the skin of the
berry, hence the name “black measles”
given to this condition in California (Fig.
6A). Masses of tiny spots are irregularly
scattered, especially toward the distal end
of the berry, although they are sometimes
distributed in longitudinal bands (Fig. 6B).
More rarely, the spots cover almost the
whole berry, which then turns brown or
violet-gray.
Spots are due to browning and necrosis
of groups of epidermal and hypodermal
cells near the terminal part of a xylem
vessel and do not extend to the underlying
tissues (32). Within a grape cluster, the
severity of spotting may differ from berry
to berry. Even with only light spotting,
table grapes are not easily sold on the marFig. 2. Pattern of wood colonization of a grapevine trunk by esca fungi (left, transverse sections; right, median longitudinal section). The occurrence (percent isolation)
of three fungal species (Fomitiporia punctata [Fp], Phaeoacremonium chlamydosporum [Pch], and P. aleophilum [Pal]), as found in a survey in central Italy, is reported for each trunk portion. The white rot fungus, F. punctata, prevails in the completely decayed wood and decreases toward the healthy wood as P. chlamydosporum
and P. aleophilum become dominant. These two fungi are mainly found in the black
streaks and brown-red wood, both in the wood portions around the pith and at the
margin of the decayed wood tissues. Green arrows, pruning wounds; BN, brown necrosis; BRW, brown-red wood; AP, altered pith; BS, brown to black streaks, appearing
as black spots in cross section; DP, decayed pith; BL, black line bordering the decayed wood; DW, completely decayed wood (white rot).
Fig. 3. Cracking of a grapevine trunk in
connection with a sector of decayed
wood.
Plant Disease / May 1999 407
ket. Berries with heavy spotting often show
skin cracks and even longitudinal or transverse splits (Fig. 6B). Such fruits shrivel
and dry up or become prey to soft rotting
fungi or bacteria.
Sometimes clusters on diseased vines
show late ripening with low sugar content
and altered berry flavor, or a slow wilt of
the distal parts, whose berries lose turgor
and fail to ripen.
As with foliar symptoms, fruit symptoms do not necessarily appear on the same
diseased plant every year. Symptoms can
affect only some berries in a single cluster,
all clusters on a branch, or a number of
branches.
The dark spotting of grape berries could
result from diffusion through the vascular
Fig. 5. Effect of the absorption for a few hours of 15-day-old Phaeoacremonium chlamydosporum culture filtrate diluted 1:10 (left)
and of 5-day-old Fomitiporia punctata culture filtrate diluted 1:1 (right) on detached grape leaves. (photos courtesy F. Lops)
Fig. 4. Foliar symptoms of esca first appear as chlorotic spots that subsequently coalesce, turning dark red in some red cultivars
like Cabernet (A), and finally becoming necrotic. Dead tissues appear dark brown to red-brown, depending on the cultivar (B and
C). Symptoms often extend to the interveinal areas of the foliar blade, leaving a narrow strip of unaffected tissue along the main
veins (D), thus giving the leaves a characteristic tiger-stripe pattern. (photos courtesy G. Minervini, [A], and S. Frisullo [D])
408 Plant Disease / Vol. 83 No. 5
system of enzymes that oxidize or polymerize phenolic substances in the epicarp,
in conditions of high irradiation, but more
probably it is caused by toxins translocated
to the fruits by the same route.
Acute esca syndrome. “Vine apoplexy”
appears suddenly in the middle of summer
as a rapid basipetal wilt of entire vines,
including the clusters, rarely of single
branches (Fig. 7). Green, healthy-looking
leaves turn pale green, then gray-green,
and quickly wither, drying up completely
in a few days.
Apoplexy is thought to be favored by
hot summers, in particular, when rainfall is
followed by dry, hot weather. It may be
connected with a rapid rise in the concentration and activity of toxic metabolites in
the crown when the rate of transpiration is
high.
Related Syndromes
Wood discoloration with brown or black
streaks (brown wood-streaking) is a common internal symptom of esca-infected
grapevines, but it is also similar to the
wood streaking of declining vines reported
by Petri in southern Italy (Sicily) at the
beginning of the twentieth century (58).
Externally, these plants showed a general
decline and stunted growth, a condition
often confused with viral diseases
(arricciamento or court-noué), whose cause
was unknown at the time. The internal
symptoms were described by Petri as
“gommosi del legno da ferita” (woundrelated wood gummosis) and “venature
brune del legno” (brown to black wood
streaking). These longitudinal streaks or
columns of discolored wood are similar to
a condition called bacterial gummosis by
Prillieux and Delacroix (60). They originate in pruning wounds or at the graft union and appear as minute black or dark
brown spots in cross section. Sometimes
the streaks are even formed by isolated
xylem vessels and the related parenchyma
cells. Brown or black streaking, with the
presence of gummy masses in the xylem
vessels, can extend so deeply into the trunk
as to reach the roots.
According to Petri, brown wood-streaking predisposed the vine plant to wood
decay or even represented the first signs of
esca.
Syndromes in many respects similar to
the syndrome observed by Petri in Italy
have been reported from other parts of the
world, particularly from young vineyards
(see below). Affected vines with such a
syndrome sometimes show a sudden collapse, but more frequently a progressive
decline, slow dieback, and stunted growth,
with various foliar symptoms (chlorosis,
marginal necrosis, wilting). In every case,
they show blackish or brown woodstreaking and xylem gummosis similar to
the wood discoloration observed in escaaffected adult vines. Table 1 shows reported examples of such syndromes and of
browning of grapevine wood in propagating material examined before planting.
Pathogen or Pathogens?
Despite observations made by researchers for more than a century, the etiology of
esca is still controversial, and several fungi
have been associated with it.
White rot basidiomycetes. The association of esca symptoms with wood decay
dates back to early works on the subject
(66), but both the number and identity of
the fungi causing esca have long been debated. In France, Italy, and other countries
(1,9,28–31,43,61,62,65,78,79), P. igniarius
and, to a lesser extent, S. hirsutum were for
many years the basidiomycetes most commonly associated with white rot of grapevine. For this reason, one or the other of
these fungi was also presumed to be the
real cause of esca. This etiology, however,
was never established by reproducing all
the disease symptoms.
Knowledge about the basidiomycetous
fungi involved in wood decay of vines has
progressed in recent years (12,13,38,
39,44,53,69).
In Italy, white rot of vine wood was only
very infrequently associated with S. hirsuFig. 6. Spotting of grape berries (black measles). Minute dark brown or purple spots on the berry skin can be scattered (A) or distributed in bands (B). Cracks can also form on the berry. (photos courtesy S. Frisullo)
Plant Disease / May 1999 409
tum, but the great majority of white rot
samples examined was colonized by a
fungus that was initially classified as P.
igniarius on the basis of in vitro cultures.
Work carried out in France (40) in the
same years also led to the isolation of S.
hirsutum with very low frequency, but here
the basidiomycete most commonly found
was Phellinus punctatus (P. Karst.) Pilát.
The correct name for this species is
Fomitiporia punctata (Fr.) Murrill (25).
Further studies of a group of strains isolated in Italy has shown that these strains
were actually F. punctata (M. Fischer and
L. Mugnai, unpublished). It seems therefore that previous records of P. igniarius
were misidentifications of F. punctata, and
that this is the basidiomycete commonly
associated with decayed wood, at least in
France and Italy.
Nonbasidiomycetous fungi associated
with esca. In some vine-growing areas of
the Mediterranean where the prevailing
climate is of the continental type, the ascomycete Eutypa lata (Pers.:Fr.) Tul. & C.
Tul. is quite frequently isolated from discolored vine wood, and this could be
thought to complicate the picture of esca
syndrome. E. lata, however, is known to
cause a distinct disease, Eutypa dieback,
with its own symptomatology. Sometimes
Eutypa dieback and esca occur on the same
vine during a growing season, the former
producing reduced, bushy growth and leaf
yellowing in May, the latter—on a different branch or even on the same branch—
leaf chlorosis and necrosis in summer (45).
In the more southerly vine-growing areas
of Europe, E. lata either is not found at all
or is rare on esca-affected vines. Another
plant pathogenic ascomycete commonly
isolated from the trunks and branches of
esca-affected grapevines is Botryosphaeria
obtusa (Schwein.) Shoemaker.
Chiarappa (9) reported that the brownred marginal zones bordering the decayed
wood of grapevines affected with black
measles were colonized by a Cephalosporium-like species, which discolored vinewood in vitro and produced brown streaks
when inoculated into standing grapevines.
In Europe, several mitosporic fungi, including undetermined species of Cephalosporium, Acremonium, and Phialophora,
were isolated with relatively high frequency from the wood of esca-diseased
grapevines (5,20,31,44), but their role in
the disease process has remained unknown.
That a succession of fungi might be involved in the esca disease process was first
proposed by the French researchers
Larignon and Dubos (39), who suggested
that each fungus was associated with a
particular stage of wood discoloration.
Species of Phialophora, Cephalosporium,
Table 1. Reports of declines of young grapevines associated with brown wood-streaking and of wood discoloration of rooted cuttings
Syndrome or disease name Associated microorganisms Country and references
Brown wood-streaking (wound-related gummosis) Two Cephalosporium species (possibly identical to
Phaeoacremonium chlamydosporum and P. aleophilum)
Italy (58)
Wood discoloration of rooted cuttings before
planting
Several fungi, including Acremonium sp. Italy (27)
Slow dieback Phialophora parasitica (=P. chlamydosporum) South Africa (24)
Black goo P. chlamydosporum California (47,48; L. Chiarappa,
personal communication)
P. chlamydosporum Australia (56)
Phaeoacremonium grapevine decline P. chlamydosporum, P. aleophilum, P. inflatipes California (68)
Wood discoloration of rooted cuttings before
planting
P. chlamydosporum Italy and France (2,77)
Decline of young grapevines P. chlamydosporum Italy (authors’ observations)
Fig. 7. A grapevine plant showing sectorial symptoms of apoplexy caused by esca
disease. Green, healthy-looking leaves and grape clusters quickly wither, drying completely in a few days, but usually remain attached to the plant.
410 Plant Disease / Vol. 83 No. 5
and Eutypa were supposed to be the first
wood colonizers, or pioneer fungi. Italian
workers also examined the initial stages of
wood discoloration, described by them as
brown-red wood and black streaks developing at the margin of already discolored
wood (52,53). In these tests, two mitosporic fungi were consistently isolated
from the discolored wood, and it appeared
they could be related to the two main pioneer fungi identified by Larignon and
Dubos: Cephalosporium sp. and Phialophora parasitica Ajello, L.K. Georg, &
C.J.K. Wang. These two mitosporic fungi
isolated in Italy were assigned to a single
new genus, Phaeoacremonium, as P.
chlamydosporum and P. aleophilum W.
Gams, P.W. Crous, M.J. Wingfield &
Mugnai (14). Interestingly, the strain of
Cephalosporium (CBS 239.74) isolated by
Chiarappa (9) in California from the discolored wood of black measles–affected
vines, and later considered to be close to
Phialophora parasitica (34), was also
eventually referred to P. chlamydosporum
(14). These same two species of
Phaeoacremonium were then reported to
be the main pioneer fungi by Larignon and
Dubos as well (40). Other Phaeoacremonium species isolated from grapevine are P.
angustius and P. inflatipes W. Gams, P.W.
Crous, & M.J. Wingfield (Table 2) (14).
More recently, Dupont et al. (21) provided morphological, cultural, and molecular evidence to show that P. chlamydosporum and P. aleophilum have a distant
phylogenetic relationship to each other.
The first species is closer to Phialophora
verrucosa Medlar than to Phaeoacremonium parasiticum (Ajello et al.) W. Gams,
Crous, & M.J. Wingfield. In light of these
findings, the whole genus will have to be
reassessed and the species P. chlamydosporum redisposed in another genus (P. W.
Crous, personal communication).
Fungi associated with the decline of
young grapevines. Some of the mitosporic
fungi associated with esca are also involved in the decline of young grapevines
and brown wood-streaking. Such involvement was first reported in Italy by Petri
(58) on young grafted vines and mother
plants. Declining vines showed brown or
black streaking from which Petri isolated
two strains (α and β) of Cephalosporium
and one strain of Acremonium that did not
correspond to any species known at the
time. On the basis of Petri’s descriptions,
Cephalosporium strain α and Acremonium
sp. can be referred with sufficient accuracy
to P. chlamydosporum and P. aleophilum,
respectively. Petri also succeeded in reproducing brown streaking on standing vines
by injecting the fungi isolated from diseased vines into the xylem elements
through large wounds made on healthylooking plants.
Since that time, cases of decline of
young grapevines associated with brownwood streaking and gummosis have been
recorded in several countries under different names (Table 1). In South Africa, a
slow decline of young vines was initially
associated with P. parasitica (24). Subsequently, however, this fungus was also
reassigned to P. chlamydosporum (strain
STE-U 809) (14). In California, three
species of Phaeoacremonium, P. chlamydosporum, P. inflatipes, and P. aleophilum,
isolated from declining vines have been
shown to be pathogenic to grape seedlings
(68). Finally, in different areas of Italy, a
heavy colonization by P. chlamydosporum
was noted on declining 2-year-old vines
(authors’ personal observations) (Fig. 8).
Microorganisms in Wood
of Esca-Diseased Grapevines
In general, two main models have been
proposed to describe wood decay development in standing trees: the “conditioning
of microenvironment” (CM model) (7) and
the “compartmentalization of decay in
trees” (CODIT model) (73).
The CODIT model postulates a microbial succession in the colonization of wood
in standing trees subsequent to wounding.
Initially, there is a host response to
wounding; this is followed by the invasion
of the modified wood substrate by nondecay microorganisms (often mitosporic
fungi such as species of Phialophora or
Trichocladium); and finally, the decay
fungi infect wood that has been
“conditioned” by the nondecay, pioneer
organisms (42). Alternatively, decay fungi
first infect the wood tissue, but then further
colonization is blocked by the host defense
reaction, which must be overcome by the
pioneer fungi before it can proceed (75). In
both cases, the pioneer fungi have the task
of detoxifying pre- and postinfectional
antimicrobial substances.
Most of the evidence on which the succession of microorganisms in wood decay
is based can be seen in esca (38,40,52,53);
however, not all findings fit this model. In
the following description, the esca disease
process will be described under headings
consistent with the CODIT model.
Compartmentalization, discoloration,
and decay. In the trunk of a grapevine
affected with esca, an elongated portion of
woody tissue begins to discolor, starting
from a large pruning wound. The affected
tissue soon turns brown. Larger wounds
produce larger and longer brown columns,
which may extend radially to a sector and
reach the pith. However, the discolored
wood does not indicate the full extent of
fungal colonization, which appears as a
brownish column tapering distally or as
cones with the points outward spreading in
both directions from the wound (Fig. 2).
In cross section, esca-affected vine
trunks usually exhibit large necrotic areas,
often first sectorial, then central in serial
sections that are more distant from the
wounds (Fig. 1). These necrotic zones are
surrounded and preceded by small brown
or black spots (Fig. 1A to F). Eventually,
the wood decayed for the longest time
begins to show white rot (Fig. 1D to F).
Microscopic examination of wood samples from esca-affected grapevines (52)
shows that, at the advancing edge of the
Table 2. Species included in the genus Phaeoacremoniumy
Species Host or substrate Distribution
P. aleophilum Vitis vinifera France, Italy, Yugoslavia, USA
P. angustius V. vinifera, soil Argentina, France, Italy, USA
P. chlamydosporum z V. vinifera France, Italy, South Africa, USA
P. inflatipes Humans, Nectandra sp.,
Quercus virginiana, Sorbus
intermedia, V. vinifera
Costa Rica, Finland, Germany,
Tahiti, Venezuela, USA
P. parasiticum Humans, Prunus armeniaca Tunisia, USA
P. rubrigenum Humans USA
y From references 14, 21, 40.
z This species will be redisposed in another genus (P. W. Crous, personal communication).
Fig. 8. Cross section through the rootstock stem of a 2-year-old grapevine
(Victoria/775 Paulsen) showing symptoms of decline. The section shows
wood browning and black spots (which
appear as black streaks in longitudinal
section) due to the presence of dark
colored, gummy masses in the xylem
elements. The discolored wood was
found to be colonized by Phaeoacremonium chlamydosporum.
Plant Disease / May 1999 411
discolored wood stripes, the first reaction
of the xylem to fungal advance is almost
always heavy tylosis and gummosis. The
accumulation of tylosis and gels or dark
brown gum gives rise to the discolored
strands or streaks, which may extend longitudinally for tens of centimeters away
from the wound, appearing in cross section
as either isolated black spots or groups of
spots around an annual ring.
When the colonizing fungi spread out
into the functional sapwood, a more diffuse
wood reaction causes the formation of
brown-red or pink-brown areas, which
often enclose the black streaks (Fig. 1A
and B).
Occurrence of different fungal species
at different stages of wood decay. The
systematic isolation of fungi (Table 3)
from the discolored or decayed wood of
esca-diseased grapevines indicated a close
relation between individual stages of wood
deterioration and particular species of
fungi (40,44,50,53). Up to 30 species of
fungi were isolated from the initial stages
of wood discoloration, but only a few of
these were consistently present with relatively high frequency. The most frequent
of these was P. chlamydosporum (approximately 64% of isolations from black
streaks and 57% from brown-red wood in
the survey illustrated in Table 3), often
together with P. aleophilum. These species
were also the most commonly isolated
from the brown-red discolored wood when
it surrounded white-rotted wood (Fig. 2).
From the white-rotted wood itself, which is
the last stage of wood degradation, F.
punctata was most often isolated (Table 3,
Fig. 2). S. hirsutum was always very rare.
The low isolation percentages of basidiomycetes from the marginal areas of decayed wood, as well as from the
brown/black streaks, were not due to the
faster growth in vitro of concomitant fungi,
as has been suggested for other pathosystems (42). Experiments on different culture
media showed that isolates of F. punctata
actually grew much faster than isolates of
the two species of Phaeoacremonium (49).
For example, P. chlamydosporum required
as long as 2 months to come out from
wood chips and grow onto agar plates (Fig.
9).
Decay progression is enhanced by
substrate conditioning. In the decayed
trunks of many tree species (6,70–72,74),
the development of reddish, brown, or
brightly discolored wood is associated with
an increase in the concentration of antimicrobial substances such as phenolic compounds produced by the xylem parenchyma
cells in response to invasion, presumably
in order to inhibit fungal growth (57). In
many cases, it has been suggested that
pioneer fungi are able to overcome the host
defense reaction by growing despite a high
concentration of phenolics and related
oxidation products, which they detoxify,
thereby making possible the growth of
wood-decay agents (63 and literature cited
therein). Indeed, an ability to grow despite
the presence of fungal growth inhibitors
produced by the woody tissues of the host
tree may well be the most important function of pioneer microorganisms in the microbial succession theory.
The grapevine is a plant relatively rich
in phenolics (64), compounds that could
have a role in regulating fungal succession
during wood decay.
Growth tests in vitro (49) showed that:
(i) in a medium in which gallic acid was
the sole carbon source, P. chlamydosporum
was able to grow, but the growth of F.
punctata was completely inhibited; and (ii)
if the medium was first conditioned by
culturing P. chlamydosporum, the subsequent growth of F. punctata was unhindered (Table 4). Other differences in the
growth of pioneer and decay fungi on phenol-enriched media (Table 5), including
differences in the total amount of phenols
extracted from grapevine wood at variously discolored decay stages, were also
recorded (38).
The wood-colonizing fungi show varying ability to utilize nutrients made available in injured tissues, such as the starch
stored in abundance in the parenchyma
rays. Microscopic examination of cross
sections of esca-infected wood showed
complete depletion of starch in the xylem
tissue surrounding the brown-black streaks.
The same picture was seen in the brownred wood that developed later, but not in
brown necrosis, nor in the discoloration
Table 3. Most common fungi (isolation frequency >1%) isolated from each type of wood symptom detected in grape plantsx affected by esca
Wood chips colonized Fungal speciesz
 (%)
Type of wood symptom
Wood chips
sampled (no.)
by fungi or
bacteriay (%)
Phaeoacremonium
chlamydosporum
P.
aleophilum
Botryosphaeria
obtusa
Eutypa
lata
Fomitiporia
punctata
1 Healthy wood 345 18 3.2 1.6 6.4 0 0
2 Black to brown streaks 1,160 43.2 64.5 9.8 12.8 1.4 0.4
3 Brown-red wood 883 91.7 56.6 7.7 7.2 2.9 6
4 Cave or altered pith 529 78.3 18.4 21.5 15.9 6.5 5.6
5 Brown necrosis 1,269 81.7 26.8 21.3 13.1 14.9 2.3
6 White decay 313 90.1 5.7 3.2 13.8 2.1 70.6
7 Brown-red margin of
decayed wood
199 68.8 26.3 10.2 7.3 5.8 54.7
x Cultivars sampled: Cabernet, Canaiolo, Garganega, Merlot, Moscato, Regina, Riesling italico, Sangiovese, Trebbiano toscano, Trebbiano
d’Abruzzo. Italian regions surveyed were: Abruzzi, Apulia, Friuli, Lombardy, Tuscany, Umbria, Veneto, Sicily.
y Number of wood chips colonized as percentage of number of wood chips sampled for each symptom.
z Number of wood chips infected with each fungus as percentage of number of colonized wood chips for each symptom.
Fig. 9. Colonies of Phaeoacremonium
chlamydosporum on malt agar plates.
The fungus developed from wood fragments excised from black spots close to
the margin of a decayed trunk portion.
The colonies grow slowly in vitro, often
appearing first whitish and shiny (A),
and turning gray-olivaceous up to
blackish with age (B).
412 Plant Disease / Vol. 83 No. 5
observed in the wood of rooted vine cuttings (L. Mugnai, personal observation).
Enzyme tests in vitro showed that P.
chlamydosporum and P. aleophilum had a
high starch-degrading activity (Table 6),
whereas that of F. punctata was very low.
The well-known ligninolytic activity of
wood rotting basidiomycetes, which enables them to degrade woody tissues
completely (10,41,54), suggests that F.
punctata has a key role in the development
of white rot in esca-affected vines.
Inoculation with decay fungi alone
does not always produce decay. For
many years, inoculation of white rot
basidiomycetes into healthy grapevines has
failed to reproduce, not only esca leaf
symptoms, but even wood decay. Recently,
however, Graniti et al. in Italy (51) (Table
7) and Chiarappa in California (11)
succeeded in reproducing white rot (Fig.
10A).
If these results are confirmed, they suggest either that F. punctata is a primary
pathogen of grapevine that initiates and
completes the entire wood decay process if
it has a suitable wound and sufficient time,
or that the model of Shortle and Cowling
(75) applies here: the decay agent begins
colonization, but its continued spread depends upon the prior detoxification of inhibitory compounds produced in the reaction zone of the plant. This process is
usually carried out by other wood-colonizing fungi, but it can also occur, although
more slowly, through the sole action of the
decay agent itself.
An overall view of the evidence suggests that while some data support the
hypothesis of microbial succession in the
development of esca, other data, particularly the ability of both F. punctata and
certain species of Phaeoacremonium to act
as primary pathogens, militate against it. In
the case of an association, whereas prior
colonization of the vinewood by Phaeoacremonium or other fungi will facilitate
the progression of F. punctata into the host,
such colonization is not strictly necessary.
When these two pathogenic fungi are
present together in the woody tissue of a
grapevine, two different syndromes or
diseases may become concurrent. When
the fungi are not present together at the
appropriate time, each may induce its own
syndrome or disease.
Reproduction
of Esca Symptoms
The wood-decaying ability of F. punctata (as P. igniarius) has been demonstrated in vitro using small blocks of surface-sterilized (9) or autoclaved grapevine
wood (40,51), and by inoculation tests on
standing grapevines (11,51). Wood decay
by S. hirsutum has been brought about in
vitro with isolates from France (40,79).
As for the other internal symptoms, i.e.,
black streaking and brown-red wood discoloration, field inoculation experiments in
Italy indicated that P. chlamydosporum and
to a lesser extent P. aleophilum colonize
the wood of apparently healthy grapevines
(Table 8) (50,51). Within 1 year of inoculation, these fungi produced a well-developed discolored wood column pointing
upward and downward away from the inoculum dowel (Fig. 10B). The dark brownred discoloration extended in both directions from the inoculation point in long
black streaks (passing about 30 cm on
average beyond the brown-red necrosis).
The inoculated fungi were readily reisolated from these streaks. Microscopic examination of the darkened wood revealed
tyloses and dark gummy masses filling the
lumen of the xylem elements; these symptoms were similar to those shown by escainfected vines. A similar wood discoloration also developed in control grapevines,
which were wounded but not inoculated;
however, its extent here was restricted and
no fungi could be isolated from the discolTable 6. Enzyme activity of fungal strains isolated from esca-affected grapevines
Enzyme
Fomitiporia
punctata
(6 strains)
Phaeoacremonium
chlamydosporum
(7 strains)
Phaeoacremonium
aleophilum
(8 strains)
Ligninolytic enzymes
Phenoloxidase ++++w –x –
Laccase ++++ – –
Peroxidase ++++ + +
Cellulosolytic enzymes
Endo-1,4-β-glucanase ++++ ++++ ++++
Eso-cellobiohydrolase +/– – –
ß-glucosidase ++++ ++++ ++++
Starch hydrolysis +/–y ⊕z ⊕
w Percent strains with enzyme activity: ++++, >75%; +++, 50 to 75%; ++, 25 to 50%; +,
<25%.
x No strain with enzyme activity.
y Weak hydrolytic activity by all strains.
z High hydrolytic activity by all strains.
Table 4. Growth of Fomitiporia punctata on a gallic acid medium conditioned by previous
growth of Phaeoacremonium chlamydosporum
Preinoculation
Additions to medium before/after
growth of F. punctatax (g/liter)
Mean wt of mycelium
of F. punctatay (g/liter)
None Glucose 10/no addition 2.7 abz
Glucose 10/gallic acid 8.1 0.0 a
Gallic acid 1/no addition 0.0 a
Gallic acid 1/glucose 8.76 0.0 a
P. chlamydosporum Glucose 10/gallic acid 8.1 4.35 bc
Gallic acid 1/glucose 8.76 3.36 ab
x P. chlamydosporum was grown in the mineral medium of Eriksson and Pettersson (23)
containing glucose (10 g/liter) or gallic acid (1 g/liter). After incubation for 25 days at 25°C
on a rotary shaker and before inoculation with F. punctata, the culture medium was filtersterilized and the resulting culture filtrate was not supplemented, or supplemented with 8.1
g of gallic acid per liter if it contained glucose, or with 8.76 g of glucose per liter if it contained gallic acid.
y Mean oven-dried weight, growth after 40 days.
z Means with different letters differed significantly at P = 0.01 (Tukey’s test).
Table 5. Effect of the addition of five phenolic compounds to a basal medium on the growth
of Fomitiporia punctata, Phaeoacremonium chlamydosporum, and P. aleophilum at 25 days
Phenolic compound (1g/liter)z
Fungus
Caffeic
acid
Gallic
acid
Syringic
acid
Tannic
acid
Vanillic
acid
F. punctata –22 –8 –100 –53 –100
P. chlamydosporum –6 +15 +1 +46 –71
P. aleophilum –66 +39 –30 –63 –100
z –, percent growth inhibition over controls; +, percent growth stimulation over controls.
Plant Disease / May 1999 413
ored tissues. No symptoms were noted in
the foliage of inoculated vines over the 18
months of these experiments (L. Mugnai et
al. and A. Graniti et al., unpublished).
Similar results with both species of
Phaeoacremonium were obtained in France
(40).
As already mentioned, the wood-colonizing ability of Cephalosporium strains
later identified as P. chlamydosporum had
been previously demonstrated on standing
adult vines both in Italy (58) and in California (9).
So far, artificial infections with F.
punctata, P. chlamydosporum, and P.
aleophilum on the vine trunk and branches
have not been able to reproduce the foliar
symptoms of esca. This could be because
the tests were too short in duration for the
inoculated fungi to colonize and degrade
the woody tissue sufficiently to affect the
leaves. However, the absence of foliar
symptoms may also be due to the same
factors that cause the irregular recurrence
of foliar symptoms in the vineyard from
year to year: the lack of a combination of
optimal circumstances that is not easy to
imitate in an artificial environment and that
includes the production of bioactive fungal
metabolites, their transport and accumulation in sufficient concentration in the target
organs, and the activation of their mechanism of action.
Sources of Inoculum
S. hirsutum, although only infrequently
associated with decay of grapevine wood,
readily forms basidiocarps on wooden
stakes used for support or trellising, so that
wind-borne basidiospores of this fungus
can nevertheless easily reach and colonize
wound surfaces on vines.
F. punctata (or P. igniarius) produces its
basidiocarps on many broadleaf tree species, including several forest trees. These
structures are rarely produced on the living
trunks of esca-infected vines, but they are
occasionally encountered on dead vine
trunks or branches left in the field or at the
edge of vineyards after pruning. Inoculum
production via spores produced by basidiocarps may therefore not be common in the
vineyard. The proximity of woods or tree
plantings does not seem to cause a higher
incidence of esca in nearby vineyards. It
seems probable, therefore, that the basidiospores, released and disseminated by air
currents, play only a minor role in the
spread of esca. The observation that the
spread of esca tends to be along the rows
of vines (1,12) suggests that the fungal
inoculum is carried by the tools used in
grafting and pruning.
As far as P. chlamydosporum and its
congeneric species on vines (14) are concerned, although pertinent data are lacking,
it is likely that conidia are produced in
abundance during the saprobic phase on
Table 7. Inoculation experimentsv with Fomitiporia punctata on grapevines in the field (13-year-old, cv. Sangiovese) and in glasshouse (2-yearold, cv. Italia)
Extent of discoloration in vine wood
(cm)
Infected vines showing white rot
(%)
Reisolation of F. punctata from
altered or decayed wood (%)
Experiment Inoculated vines Control Inoculated vines Control Inoculated vines Control
Field 6.2w 5.8x 24 0 13 0
Glasshouse 13y 8z 20 0 20 0
v Inoculations were performed by inserting a colonized agar plug (sterile agar plug for controls) into wound. Results were recorded 2 years after
inoculation.
w Average of 45 replicates.
x Average of 15 replicates.
y Average of 75 replicates.
z Average of 25 replicates.
Fig. 10. (A) Decayed wood in a grapevine branch inoculated with Fomitiporia punctata.
Two years after inoculation, white rot extended from the pith into the nonfunctional
wood. (B) Section through the trunk of a 6-year-old grapevine, 3 months after inoculation with Phaeoacremonium chlamydosporum. Brown-red wood and brown to black
streaks developed from the inoculation site. From these areas, the fungus was reisolated after 1 year up to 30 cm above and below the inoculation site with an average
80% success rate.
414 Plant Disease / Vol. 83 No. 5
dead vinewood or other plant debris and
that chlamydospores persist in the soil. The
inoculum is then available to infect trunks,
branches, and roots through injuries caused
by pruning, grafting, or in other ways.
Another possibility is that species of
Phaeoacremonium are already present in
the propagation material (cuttings and
rootstock) (47,68), derived either from
mother plants that harbor fungal infections
in a more or less latent form (endophytic),
or from scions or rooted cuttings that have
become infected through cuts and other
wounds during preparation and storage. P.
chlamydosporum has been isolated with
high frequency (16 to 55%) from rooted
vine cuttings produced in Italy or France;
these cuttings show wood darkening,
gummosis, and black streaking (2,77).
Environmental and Cultural
Factors
Environmental and seasonal factors appear to contribute to esca symptom expression. The characteristic interveinal chlorosis and necrosis on the leaves, which is
absent or indistinct in spring growth, is
fully visible in summer and autumn.
Apoplexy usually occurs only in summer.
It is likely that alternation between rainy
and dry periods, plus the occurrence of
lesions or injuries caused by freezing and
presumably hail, favor penetration of F.
punctata, species of Phaeoacremonium,
and other fungi through the resulting
wounds.
The amount of water in the soil does not
seem to be a factor in disease development,
since in southern Italy and in California,
table-grape vineyards with and without
irrigation are equally likely to exhibit esca
symptoms. In Sicily, esca is more commonly found in vineyards established on
deep, rich soils (33).
Plant age is a critical factor for esca development. Although 4- to 5-year-old vines
sometimes already show foliar symptoms
of esca, it is only on plants 10 years and
older that symptoms and damage become
more common. This age factor was related
by Viala (79) to tannin levels in the plants.
These levels increase from 12 to 13 years
until 25 to 30 years, which is also when the
vines show internal and external esca
symptoms with the highest frequency and
severity. More recent and accurate data on
the tannin-age correlation are lacking;
however, it now seems more likely that the
greater incidence of esca in old vineyards
can be explained simply by the fact that
younger plants, although affected, do not
yet show the whole range of internal and
external esca symptoms owing to the slow
development of the disease. What remains
unclear is the time required for foliar
symptoms to appear after infection, as well
as the type and extent of wood discoloration needed for symptoms to appear on the
leaves and fruits.
The type of vine training that requires
frequent and extensive pruning or large
rejuvenation cuttings creates favorable
conditions for the development of esca. A
study by Lafon (37) reported that the incidence of apoplexy was 0.1% in vineyards
trained by lateral cordon, but 15 to 20% in
vines trained by double Guyot.
Most species of Vitis and cultivars of V.
vinifera are susceptible to esca. American
vines were once considered resistant, particularly because a rootstock could produce
new shoots after the scion had dried up. It
now seems more likely, however, that
shoot production occurs because wood
discoloration proceeds from the large
branches inward to the trunk and only
rarely reaches below the graft union. Indeed, it is quite common to see American
vines that have not been grafted (e.g.,
mother plants) with all the external and
internal symptoms of esca.
Impact
Over the last 10 years, esca has gained
importance in all European vine-growing
countries, where its incidence has increased markedly (19,36). In Portugal,
Hungary, France, and Germany, esca is
estimated to have reached incidences of 20,
11, 15, and 19%, respectively (19). In Italy,
the disease is found in all vine-growing
regions. In many areas, it affects 90 to
100% of vineyards, with an annual incidence varying between 1 and 50% in 15- to
25-year-old vineyards and an average annual increase estimated at 4 to 5%. The
percentage of vines struck by apoplexy, on
the other hand, is around 2% annually
(46,55). Chronic symptoms are now frequently reported on vines younger than 8
to 10 years (12,19,46). However, the incidence of esca estimated by the presence or
absence of foliar symptoms in single years
would be variable and quite misleading,
mainly because from one year to the next,
symptoms can suddenly fail to appear in
plants whose wood is nevertheless still
Table 8. Results of inoculation experiments with Phaeoacremonium chlamydosporum and P.
aleophilum on 6-year-old grapevines cv. Sangiovesex
Fungus inoculated
Months after
inoculation
Wood discolorationy
(cm)
Wood colonizationz
(cm)
P. chlamydosporum 3 25 22.6
6 31.7 31.7
9 47.1 40.3
P. aleophilum 3 22.9 2.9
6 25.6 0.7
9 36 4.2
Control 3 10.2 0.0
6 6.2 0.0
9 15 0.0
x Means of three replicates.
y Extent of discolored wood portions above and below inoculation site.
z Extent of wood colonized by each fungus above and below inoculation site.
Fig. 11. Esca spread, as estimated by external symptoms, in an old grape cv.
Sangiovese vineyard in central Italy in the period 1992 to 1995. In the portion of the
vineyard depicted on the map, the disease incidence was 19% in 1995, but it would
have been 49% if all plants showing symptoms at least once during the 4-year test
period had been counted. Diseased vines tended to be grouped together along the
rows of the vineyard.
Plant Disease / May 1999 415
infected. In central Italy, a 4-year survey of
a vineyard of approximately 2,000 vines
showed that only about 3% of diseased
plants exhibited foliar symptoms in all 4
years in succession; 11.5% had symptoms
in 3 years out of 4, 23% in 2 years out of 4,
and 53% in only 1 year out of 4. During
that same period, about 10% of the vines
that had shown symptoms died of apoplexy
(Fig. 11). In order to assess esca incidence
correctly, therefore, vineyards should be
monitored for at least 3 to 4 years in succession. In fact, examination of vine trunks
made when vines are being uprooted reveals that the percentage of vines with
internal symptoms of esca is much higher
than that of vines with foliar symptoms.
Control
Chemical control of esca is still carried
out by means of sodium arsenite treatments, at least in France, Portugal, and
Spain, where its use has not yet been
banned. Although the mode of action of the
arsenites is not completely understood,
they prevent or limit the symptoms of esca.
Treatments are usually applied by spraying
or painting the trunks and main branches
with a sodium arsenite solution (12.5
g/liter). Treatments should be applied for 2
consecutive years, at least 2 weeks after
pruning and not later than 3 weeks before
sprouting (15). In the third and fourth
years, the treatment can be omitted but
must then be repeated in the following 2
years, and so on. The treatment threshold,
i.e., percentage of affected vines in a vineyard at which intervention is required,
varies from 0.5 to 2% (8).
A number of other chemicals (dinitroorthocresol, fenarimol, furmetamide,
benodanil, fosetyl Al, and several triazole
fungicides) have been tested but are not
really effective in controlling esca (3,16–
18). First attempts at biological control by
applying a suspension of Trichoderma
viride spores in a 3% glycerin solution
onto fresh pruning wounds have also been
unsuccessful (4).
Traditional cultural methods to prevent
and treat esca therefore remain essential to
ensure the health of vineyards and keep
losses to a minimum. These methods include, first, ensuring that propagation material always comes from nurseries or
mother plants with no wood darkening. In
established vineyards, vines showing foliar
symptoms and white rot of the trunk can be
treated surgically by excising the rotten
wood and protecting the resulting wounds.
Healthy vines require special measures to
minimize the risk of infection or reinfection. These include: (i) avoiding large
wounds and protecting any wound made
with a healing varnish or a dressing containing a broad-spectrum fungicide (copper, maneb, flusilazol, carbendazim, etc.);
(ii) treating grapevines with fungicides
soon after a severe frost; (iii) pruning
healthy-looking vines before other vines
that may not be healthy or are clearly diseased. In addition, clean pruning tools after
each operation by immersing them in a
disinfecting solution (formol, copper sulfate, etc.); (iv) do not chop or bury pruning
residues, but burn or remove them from the
vineyard; (v) uproot and take away from
the vineyard all dead vines and scrap materials left over from surgical operations on
diseased vines.
As a sanitary measure, in autumn or in
winter, affected vines can be cut 5 to 10 cm
below the rotted or discolored wood; the
cut surface is then protected with one of
the healing mixtures mentioned above (26).
Recently, this practice has been applied
successfully in central Italy by selecting a
shoot for cutting the same year that chronic
esca symptoms first appear (Fig. 12). The
following spring, a shoot is raised that will
replace the canopy in 2 to 3 years (22).
This process makes it possible to have a
vigorous shoot that can take over without
any significant loss of production from a
plant that otherwise would have to be discarded because of esca.
Finally, we should mention a traditional
cure for esca applied in ancient times, and
occasionally even today in some parts of
the Mediterranean region, in which the
trunk is cut and kept open by inserting a
stone, leaving the rotted wood exposed to
the air (67) (Fig. 13). This practice allows
the foliar symptom development of esca to
be delayed for a certain time.
Esca: Disease Complex
or Association of Diseases?
In this review, we began by considering
esca as a single but complex disease. We
attempted to identify those symptoms that
Fig. 12. An efficient sanitation procedure to restore an esca-affected vine consists in
raising a basal shoot upon appearance of the first foliar symptoms of esca. The shoot
is then grown for the following 2 to 4 years while the vine, although showing symptoms, usually remains productive. As soon as the new basal shoot is ready for grape
production, the affected trunk portion is removed. (photo courtesy E. Egger)
416 Plant Disease / Vol. 83 No. 5
can coexist in individual vines, and that
therefore seem to be part of one disease,
albeit with different phases.
Upon the supposition that esca is a single disease, let us consider, for the sake of
simplicity, the three fungi that are most
commonly found in the woody tissues of
esca-affected vines, P. chlamydosporum, P.
aleophilum, and F. punctata. In a twophase model of esca, the first two species
are assumed to be already present in the
rootstocks or scions, or in any case to
penetrate and invade the vines in the first
years after planting. Through the xylem
vessels and parenchyma rays, these fungi
then penetrate deeply inside the trunk and
soon become the major inducers of black
or brown wood streaks and brown-red
wood discoloration. When circumstances
are favorable, external symptoms reveal
this internal infection (first phase). F.
punctata, on the other hand, usually enters
the vine later through grafting or pruning
wounds. Its advance in the woody tissues
is slow and is favored by previous colonization of P. chlamydosporum or other
fungi. Degradation of the wood proceeds
until it is completely decayed to white rot
(second phase). The final outcome of this
model, which implies a succession of microorganisms, is therefore the full range of
esca symptoms.
An alternative model, based on an association of microorganisms, gives due
weight to the fact that one of the fungi
involved, F. punctata, appears able to behave as a primary (wound) pathogen of a
localized disease with potential systemic
effects, causing extensive wood decay
(white rot) with or without symptoms on
the crown. According to this model, therefore, esca would be not a simple disease,
but an association of two different diseases, whose internal symptoms are wood
discoloration (mostly caused by species of
Phaeoacremonium) and wood decay
(caused by F. punctata), respectively. The
two diseases can coexist in the same vine
or evolve into each other with time. The
final result would depend on (i) the site
and the time of infection of each of the
fungi involved; (ii) the relative extent of
their colonization; (iii) the prevalence of
one pathogen over the others; (iv) other
conditions that can explain the variability
and inconstancy of the external symptoms.
If we consider what syndromes the fungi
involved in esca produce on vineyards of
different ages, we can distinguish the following related conditions or diseases:
1. A decline of young grapevines is associated with species of Phaeoacremonium:
P. chlamydosporum, P. aleophilum, P.
inflatipes, and perhaps P. angustius, infecting mainly the rootstock. The internal symptoms are black or brown wood
streaks, wood gummosis, or xylem darkening. Affected vines undergo decline,
wilting, dieback, and death. This disease
is known by a variety of local or common names, the last being Phaeoacremonium grapevine decline (68). However, the major incitant of this decline, P.
chlamydosporum, will be disposed in
another genus (P. W. Crous, personal
communication), and consequently the
name given to this disease is no longer
appropriate and should be changed. For
this reason we propose “Petri grapevine
decline” in honor of L. Petri, who was
the first to relate wood brown-streaking
and wood gummosis to fungal infection
by Acremonium-like fungi and saw the
close relation between brown woodstreaking and esca.
2. On established grapevines, a condition
or disease related to esca is characterized mainly by symptoms on the leaves
(interveinal chlorosis and necrosis) and
possibly on the fruits (black measles),
with wilt of the branches, as well as
wood discoloration and gummosis. It is
caused primarily by infections of one or
more species of Phaeoacremonium
through wounds during the first years of
growth or later. This condition has to be
referred to as the “brown wood-streaking” of Petri, or since it may eventually
turn into true esca, it could be called by
the popular name “young esca.”
3. Mature and old vines can suffer from a
condition in which F. punctata or other
wood-rotting basidiomycetes penetrate
through wounds, invade the woody tissues, and become predominant over
other concomitant fungi, causing complete decay of part of the trunk, i.e.,
white rot with or without symptoms on
the crown. When white rot is concomitant with brown wood-streaking, the affected vines show the whole range of
internal and external symptoms of the
disease that is currently known as “esca”
(esca proper).
From the number of hypotheses proposed in this paper, it seems clear that
research on esca disease is far from being
conclusive. Much work still needs to be
carried out in order to fully understand
how the different syndromes develop and
their relationship, and to collect all the
necessary data to demonstrate experimentally whether esca is a disease complex or
an association of two diseases.
Acknowledgments
Original information reported in this work refers to research supported by grants from the
Regione Toscana (ARSIA), the Italian Ministry for
Universities and Scientific and Technological
Research (MURST), and the National Research
Council (CNR). We would like to express our
gratitude to L. Chiarappa (Davis, CA, USA) and S.
Woodward (Aberdeen, UK) for fruitful discussion
and critical revision of the text. Thanks are due to
the members of the International Council on
Grapevine Trunk Diseases (ICGTD), convened in
California in July 1998, for giving us an update on
the declines of young grapevines. Thanks are also
cordially extended to E. Bertelli, L. Sparapano, G.
Bruno, and C. Ciccarone, who cooperated with us
in some parts of the research on esca, and to A.
Esposito for technical assistance and L. Bonuomo
for image composition. Figures (Figs. 4B, 6, and
10A) were reproduced from the proceedings of a
meeting (32,51), with permission of Ente Regionale per lo Sviluppo dell’Agricoltura (E.R.S.A.),
Udine, Italy.
Literature Cited
 1. Baldacci, E., Belli, G., and Fogliani, G. 1962.
Osservazioni sulla sintomatologia e
sull’epidemiologia della carie del legno di
vite (mal dell’esca) da Phellinus (Fomes) ignarius (L. ex Fr.) Patouillard. Riv. Patol. Veg.,
Serie III 2:165-184.
 2. Bertelli, E., Mugnai, L., and Surico, G. 1998.
Presence of Phaeoacremonium chlamydosporum in apparently healthy rooted grapevine cuttings. Phytopathol. Mediterr. 37:79-
82.
 3. Bertona, A., Campagna, C., Giambelli, A.,
and Pasquali, F. 1996. Attività di Ciproconazolo (Atemi) sul complesso del “mal
dell’esca”. Pages 147-150 in: Convegno nazionale “Arsenico, Sí-No”, Codroipo, Udine, 14
dicembre 1995, Forum Fitoiatrici, ERSA,
Udine.
 4. Bisiach, M., Minervini, G., and Di Marco, S.
1996. Attualità nella difesa contro il “mal
dell’esca” della vite. Pages 123-135 in: Con