Importance
Early blight (Figure 1) and Septoria leaf spot
(Figure 2) are the most common fungal diseases
of tomato in Kentucky. Often occurring together,
these diseases can significantly reduce yields during
seasons with humid, wet weather.
Symptoms & Signs
Early Blight
Leaves
Lesions on seedling leaves, although uncommon,
begin as small, dark, slightly sunken spots that
enlarge and may exceed 1/2 inch. The circular or
elliptical spots have a target-like appearance due to
alternating light and dark brown concentric rings
(Figure 1). Early in disease development, spots may
be difficult to distinguish from bacterial spot, but as
the season progresses, rings become more apparent
within early blight lesions. Additionally, bacterial
spot typically progresses much faster than early
blight, resulting in rapid dieback.
On established plants, small, brown-black lesions
appear on older foliage, especially where leaves
touch the soil. These lesions enlarge rapidly and
are also characterized by concentric rings. Leaf
tissue surrounding the lesions may become yellow
(chlorotic) (Figure 3) and result in overall blighting of
leaves (Figure 4), followed by defoliation.
Fruit
Infections often develop near the stem attachment
on both green and maturing fruit. Like the leaf
spots, fruit lesions are also brown to black and
have concentric rings (Figure 5). Diseased areas
may appear leathery and sunken; a thick mass of
black spores develops on the surface under humid
conditions, but they may not be visible to the naked
eye. As a secondary effect of this disease, healthy
fruit can be damaged by sunscald when plants are
defoliated.
Plant Pathology Fact Sheet
Early Blight & Septoria Leaf Spot of Tomato
Disease Management for Commercial Growers
 University of Kentucky College of Agriculture, Food & Environment Extension Plant Pathology
PPFS-VG-25
College of Agriculture, Food and Environment
Cooperative Extension Service
Erica Fealko
Plant Pathology
Graduate Research Assistant
Emily Pfeufer
Plant Pathology
Extension Specialist
Agriculture & Natural Resources • Family & Consumer Sciences • 4-H/Youth Development • Community & Economic Development
Figure 1. Early blight is characterized by targetlike lesions with concentric rings.
Figure 2. Septoria leaf spots are tan to gray with
darker margins.
1
2
Stems & petioles
Lesions developing on stems and petioles are
elliptical and have the same target-like appearance
characteristic of this disease (Figure 6). These lesions
may encircle, or girdle, affected stems and petioles.
Figure 3. Leaf tissue surrounding
early blight lesions turns yellow.
Figure 4. Severe early blight
infections result in extensive
blighting and defoliation.
Figure 5. Early blight fruit
infections are similar in
appearance to foliar lesions.
Figure 6. Target-like lesions can
develop on stems and petioles as a
result of early blight infections.
Figure 7. The centers of Septoria leaf spot lesions
become dotted with fungal fruiting bodies (pycnidia).
----- Distinguishing Symptoms & Signs -----
Early Blight
Lesions with a target-like appearance due to concentric rings of light and dark brown.
Septoria Leaf Spot
Tan to grey spots with dark brown margins; tiny black dots (fungal fruiting bodies) in
spot centers.
3
4
5
7
6
Septoria Leaf Spot
Septoria leaf spot first develops on lower foliage
and progresses up the plant. It can occur at any
stage of plant maturity, but commonly develops
after the first fruit set. Lesions can appear on stems
and leaflets. The circular to semi-circular spots
have tan to gray centers with dark brown margins
(Figure 2); centers become dotted with black
spore-producing structures (pycnidia) (Figure 7).
Spots are often surrounded by a yellow halo and
individually remain smaller than 1/3 inch in diameter.
However, Septoria lesions often merge, progressing
to a blight that kills leaves and causes plants to
defoliate. Infections on fruit are exceedingly rare.
Causes & Disease Development
Early Blight
Early blight is caused by the fungal pathogen
Alternaria linariae (formerly A. tomatephila). It
overwinters on infected plant debris left behind in
cropping areas, on seeds, and in common weeds.
Initial infections via spores often develop during
periods of mild, rainy weather, conditions which
favor further spore production. The optimum
temperature range for infection is 28° to 30°C (82° to
86°F). However, even with less favorable conditions,
lesions may be visible about 7 days after infection.
Spores are mainly disseminated short distances by
wind and rain splash; however, human contact and
equipment can also aid in pathogen spread.
Septoria Leaf Spot
Septoria leaf spot is caused by the fungus Septoria
lycopersici. Plant debris in the field and weeds serve
as sources of inoculum from year to year. This fungus
can be spread by workers, equipment, and insects
moving through wet foliage, as well as rain splashing
spores from leaf to leaf. Symptoms can be visible
within 6 days of infection. Septoria can also persist
on wood and metal equipment, such as plant stakes
and cages.
Disease Management
Cultural Practices
  Rotate away from tomato, potato and other
nightshade crops for at least 2 years.
  Plant tomato varieties with tolerance to Septoria
leaf spot and early blight (see Table 1).
  Manage weeds (particularly those in the
nightshade family) that may serve as secondary hosts
for the pathogens.
  Reduce the length of time that leaves are wet (to
minimize a disease-favorable environment):
o Use wider plant spacing.
o Orient rows in the direction of prevailing winds.
o Choose planting sites with optimal early
morning sunlight and good air circulation.
o Prune leaves below the oldest fruit cluster on
select varieties.
o Avoid use of overhead irrigation.
  Use mulch under plants to reduce contact between
foliage and the soil.
  Follow good sanitation practices (clean equipment
and remove or bury all plant debris at the end
of the season) in order to reduce the amount of
overwintering inoculum for the following season.
Table 1. Tomato varieties with some tolerance to
Septoria leaf spot and early blight.
(Source: Cornell Vegetable Website).
*Cherry, grape, and hybrid varieties generally tend to be more
tolerant to these diseases than slicer, plum, or heirloom types. Early Blight Septoria
Green Doctors Frosted X
Jasper F1 X X
Matt's Wild (Heirloom) X
Mt. Magic F1 X
Super Sweet 100 F1 X
Tommy Toe (Heirloom) X
Heather X
Honey Bunch F1 X
Valentine F1 X
Virginia Select X
Aosta Valley X
Brandywine X
Marnero F1 X
Green Zebra X
Indigo Rose X
Juliet F1 X X
Plum Dandy X
Plum Regal F1 (Roma) X
Verona F1 X
Defiant F1 X
Iron Lady F1 X X
Mt. Fresh Plus F1 X
Mt. Merit F1 X
New Yorker X
Old Brooks X
Stellar F1 X X
Tropic X
Wisconsin 55 X
Tomato
Type Cultivar
Cherry*
Grape*
Heirloom
Plum
Slicer
(mostly)
Tolerance
Chemical Management
Numerous fungicides are labeled for use against Septoria leaf spot and early blight. Regular application intervals
are critical to adequate disease management. A selection of these fungicides and their FRAC codes are shown in
Table 2. When developing a fungicide program, ensure products are alternated by FRAC code.
Table 2. Fungicides
labeled for the
management of
Septoria leaf spot and
early blight in tomato.
(Source: UK Vegetable
Production Guide for
Commercial Growers
(ID-36) & Southeastern
U.S. Vegetable Crop
Handbook)
FRAC Group Product Early Blight Septoria
3 Mettle G G
3 Rhyme G ND
7 Endura G ND
7 Fontelis G F
9 Scala F ND
11* Reason F P
11* Quadris E G
11* Cabrio E G
19 Ph-D F ND
27 Curzate NC ND
11*+ 27 Tanos F F
11*+ 3 Quadris Top G G
11*+ 3 Topguard EQ G ND
11*+ M3 Dexter Max G ND
22 + M3 Gavel F F
27 + M5 Ariston F F
3 + 40 Revus Top F F
3 + 9 Inspire Super E F
4 + M5 Ridomil Gold Bravo P F
7 + 11* Luna Sensation E ND
7 + 12 Miravis Prime E E
7 + 3 Aprovia Top E F
7 + 9 Luna Tranquility E F
9 + 12 Switch F NC
M1 Fixed coppers F F
M1 + M3 ManKocide F F
M3 Ziram F F
M3 Mancozeb F F
M5 Chlorothalonil F F
M5 + U15 Orondis Opti P NC
Expected Efficacy
Efficacy ratings: E= Excellent; G=Good; F= Fair; P=Poor; NC=No Control; ND=No Data
Notes
*The early blight fungus (Alternaria linariae) has developed resistant to FRAC 11 fungicides in some areas.
FRAC 11 fungicides are not recommended if they historically have provided poor control.
Fungicides with no control for either disease = Actigard, Blocker, Forum, Myclobutanil, Orondis Gold,
Orondis Ultra, Presidio, Previcur Flex, Ranman, Ridomil Gold/Copper, Ridomil Gold MZ, Streptomycin,
Sulfur and Zampro. Zing! had no available data.